This is Rebecca Swigert interviewing Joseph
Dudzik of the U.S. Army. Where were you sent to
Vietnam? In July of 69. July of 69. Well, where were
you sent in Vietnam? I was sent to Saigon. Did you
travel out of Saigon very often? Yes, I did travel
upcountry out of... Saigon to the various
provinces and to the different cores. In Vietnam,
the locations were named after the core which had
control over the territory. I can't remember, but
it would be like one-core, two-core, and
three-core, and that would be staggered
throughout the country. So you would go into, say,
one time you'd go into I-core area, that would be
one-core, of course it was I-core because it was,
it was called I-core because they use a Roman
numeral one, so it would be I-core, two-core, and
three-core areas. And they would run from the, run
from the delta up to the, as far north before you got
into North Vietnam. Well, which military group
were you assigned to? I was assigned to the
First Logistical Command, which was located at
Long Binh. First Logistical Command. And what was
your rank in Vietnam? I started there as a major and
got promoted in September of 69 to a lieutenant
colonel. And this was all in the army? That's
right. Okay. Now, you said your mission was the
logistic? No, I was assigned to the first
logistical command, which was the parent unit.
But I had duty at a subunit, which was the United
States Army Procurement Agency, Vietnam. United
States Army Procurement Agency, Vietnam. So what
was your personal role? I was the general counsel
and staff judge advocate of the United States
Procurement Agency, Vietnam. What does that
mean? I was the chief legal officer. Okay, so were
you directly involved then with the South
Vietnamese government in Saigon?
No, it wasn't a direct involvement. We did have
some involvement in it because what we did buy in
Vietnam, we had to buy a certain amount from local
national businesses. A certain amount of the
acquisition or procurement in Vietnam had to be
from local national business, which would be the
Vietnamese. So you did become involved with the
Vietnamese government to some small extent, when
you entered into these contracts with local
businessmen. So what were the local businessmen
friendly to work with? Oh, yes. The Vietnamese
people were absolutely fantastic. The nicest
people you'd ever want to meet. They were really,
really wonderful people to associate with. You
couldn't ask for nicer people. So good. So you
personally had a lot of contact with them? Well, we
had a lot of contact with them on the sense that we
did business with them. And we did business like
from the services we purchased. We purchased
laundry services and some other types of stuff.
And also the agency itself had quite a number of
Vietnamese employees. I would say or perhaps a
third of the employees in the agency were
Vietnamese. Were they educated, very educated?
Well, you would find all degrees of that. We had a
secretary in the office whose father was a
Vietnamese army officer and she was
And she did all the clerical work in the office. And
you had some that would do translation work that
were highly educated. Translating documents.
Because any sort of agreement with the Vietnamese
to provide goods or services the document had to be
both in English and Vietnamese. So you had people
who were capable of doing this. So you had all
degrees of intelligence. I guess the people that
did the janitorial work were actually of lesser
degree of intelligence, while the people that
worked in the secretarial positions were more.
And then we had some people that worked in the
negotiating positions that were even more
talented, more talented, put it that way. Wow.
Well, what were these Vietnamese people, and
maybe just the general Vietnamese people
attitude toward the government in South Vietnam?
Did they have a lot, did they, do you know if they had
a lot of contact with the government in Saigon, or
was it? Well, you know, the city seemed to be like on
a war footing because of terrorism activities. So
the government was all pervasive. I mean, there
were soldiers on the street, there were police on
the street, all armed, and we all went around armed
because of the terrorist activity. So I would say,
yes, they had an intimate involvement with the
government just because the nation was on a
wartime footing. Were they supporting the
government? As
far as I could tell, yes. In fact, I didn't have any
doubts that they were supporting the government.
But you could say, how accurate was this
estimation or this opinion of yours? And you would
say, well, I think if they weren't, they would have
cloaked it. So I wouldn't expect it to be very
visible. But I spoke to them, and Although the
subject doesn't come up very much because it would
be embarrassing to both parties. And it would seem
like you were prying. And just as in this country,
you don't, at a dinner party or at a social
gathering, ask somebody their political
preference. Some things are just not discussed in
private company with the limited... unless one
becomes very good friends. You know, you wouldn't
speak with religion, you wouldn't speak of
politics and some other items which are rather
delicate. So it would never really get into that
sort of a conversation. But I never saw, while I was
over there, a dissatisfaction with the local
government. Well, since you were sent in 1969 and
the war had been going on for a long time, how did you
feel about being sent so far into the war? Oh, it
was, no, it really, that didn't create a problem,
never really entered into it. It was just
something I had to do as part of the career, so I went
over there. And it passed very quickly. And it was
very interesting. If you say, will you exchange
the opportunity? Will you exchange the
experience? Let's put it that way. For anything, I
would say, no, I would not exchange the
experience. You'd say, are you speaking strictly
from hindsight? I don't think so, but it's hard to
say.
I knew where I was going before I left for Vietnam,
but when I volunteered to go, it was a voluntary
move on my part, I didn't know where I would be sent.
But I did know before I arrived there. But no, it
just didn't cause a concern. Just didn't cause a
concern. Maybe it's fatalism. Well, were you
among a lot of the soldiers that went out into the
field very often? No, no, no. In this position, I
wasn't. You would get to see them by visiting
hospitals and that because we had contractors
that furnished hospital supplies and laundry
services and things for the hospital. So you would
see them, you would see them when you went out to the
field. In the place where I stayed, where I was
billeted, We had people in and out. But you usually
kept to yourself, not to yourself, to people you
worked with. And if you didn't work with troops
that were regularly going into the field, you
wouldn't exchange conversation with them of the
kind that you would get a feel with how they liked
it. Well, did you have some kind of preconceived
attitude or feeling about the Vietnamese people?
or the American involvement in the war before you
went over? No, only to the extent I had served prior
to this in Thailand. And the Thai people were just
excellent. And I thought, I guess, anticipated
that maybe the Vietnamese wouldn't be quite as
friendly because of what their country was going
through. But that proved to be erroneous. They
were just as friendly as the Thai people. Just
really fantastic. You just really have no
concept. I doubt if we were in similar
circumstances, we would be the same. We'd be as
generous, as kind, as giving, as understanding.
Right. Well, okay, you weren't there during the
Tet Offensive, but... No, I finished just right
after it. Okay, so right after it. What kind of, how
do you say, who do you put the victory to on the Tet
Offensive? Because there's kind of a lot of them. I
really, really don't know. What I would really
say, hey, it was a minor setback for us tactically.
which means the near term, so to speak.
Strategically, we probably suffered a larger
setback. But when I got there, my predecessor had
been there during 10, I believe. And where the
agency was located, which was in ,, which was right
in the midst of where the tent was, we would go to
various activities within blocks of the
headquarters and they would say, you see this
field here or this cemetery here? This was very
severely fought over during Tet.
Seeing, being there after Tet, I just didn't
observe any defeatist attitude if someone would
have perceived there that, hey, it had been a
setback. There was none of that there. Everything
was going forward with,
I don't think anybody was really concerned over a
repetition of that. Everybody looked at it as a
sort of one-shot deal. Well, the one-year terms,
do you feel that being sent for just one year, do you
think that was effective? Do you think it would
have been better to have a one-term amendment for
longer than a one-year term,
you know, to have a amendment? Well, I think it
probably depended on the position you were
occupying. Like in the position I was in, which was
right in Saigon, we lived in a hotel. The strain
wasn't at all that great. Although you were always
concerned about the terrorist activities.
So I could see that, hey, for a person serving with
the agency two or longer than a year wouldn't have
been a hardship. It might have been a hardship on
personal families, but it wouldn't have been a
hardship on the individual. Whereas someone that
was going out on combat missions into the
hinterlands
It probably would have been a different color for
them. They would have been glad to get out because
it was strange. You said you lived in a hotel. What
kind of class was it? What were the accommodations
compared to that? Well, everybody had a room.
Well, I think that depended on rank. I think there
were two to a room if
you were major or less. And I think as you went up in
rank, You would get your own room. But it was, when I
say hotel, it's a hotel in the sense that that's
what it was originally used for. But it certainly,
you wouldn't compare it to anything we have. It was
about a six-story walk-up, and there were no air
conditioning. So that wasn't a big deal. And the
window in the room that I had faced out on an air
shaft, so it was sort of
stifling during the warmer weather. But
compared, I guess, to somebody that was out in the
field, I guess it was fairly luxurious. It was in
the Chinese section of Cholan. It took us about 20
minutes to a half hour to go each morning from the
hotel to work. Oh, to work. What did you do in Saigon
during the time you were off? What was there to do in
Saigon? We worked seven days a week. Oh, you worked
all the time? Worked all the time. Worked all the
time. In the evening, they had... You ate at the
hotel, and in the evening, they had a... They would
get USO shows in and various entertainment shows.
It was all USO shows. But they weren't...
Very few American shows. American performers.
Most of them Korean or Japanese or Philippine.
That's right. And very nice and very enjoyable.
So... In the routine, you would come home and have
supper. And
if it wasn't too late or you weren't too tired,
you'd go to sit in one of these shows and maybe have
either a drink or a soft drink or something like
that. And then you would go to bed. That would be me.
I had a shortwave radio and... You could sit up and
get programs, as I recollect, from Australia. It
used to come in pretty good in the evenings. Or else
you could go to, right down the street, I remember,
there was a New Zealand outfit. And you could go to
that place and they would have... New Zealand and
Australian beer. You would know you wouldn't, but
you would have beer here. You didn't get tired of
these things. You were sort of appalled after a
while. So what you do is you get into a routine,
going to work. And you worked till late in the
evening, till sometimes 6 or 7 o'clock. So there
really wasn't that much time. I
know, I think I gave a half a day every other week, at
least in my division which I worked. And it was a
half a day, perhaps a Saturday afternoon. And
people, of course, could go to church services on
Sunday. But I just stayed there right through. I
just didn't take the afternoon. Well, did you have
any kind of contact with the army? Well, yes. Yes,
we did, because we did supply certain things to
them. But not really that much contact. I had more
contact with the Vietnamese civilians. than I did
have with the Arvin. So you wouldn't be able to make
any kind of judgment of quality? No. In fact, as far
as troops are concerned, I had more contact with
the Koreans, because there were Korean troops
that lived in the same hotel. We've read some stuff
on the Koreans. What were they like? I mean, they
could be brutal. Oh, yes. Yes, yes. Well, what
really impressed you with the Koreans was, We had,
we contracted for a lot of in-country trucking.
And some of these contractors were American firms
and some were Korean firms. They contracted and
these firms did trucking for, between port and
between various installations on a contract
basis, which we paid them. And one of these firms
was the Hanjin Company of Korea, a Korean firm. And
they were closely associated with the White Horse
Division, which was the Korean division there.
And we had very little trouble with the Korean,
with the Korean convoys being attacked or
pilferage from the Koreans and that. They were
usually very, very good. We paid a good price for
them, but they were, I guess it was because they are
very pragmatic people. They saw things as they
were, and they had a certain firmness of purpose.
And I was inclined to think that most of the
contract employees, say for the Korean firms,
ex-Korean Army. So the Hanjin Trucking Company
was run like a military organization. If you
visited their headquarters in one of the northern
provinces, you saw barracks and uniforms and
shoes lined up. You would think it was the Korean
Army. So it was almost like a quasi-military
organization, although it was civilian. I don't
know whether the employees rotated between the
army and the organization, but it had a lot of
characteristics of a military organization.
Well, then your department did the legal kind of
contracts and stuff like that? We contracted for
stevedoring services at the port. That would
involve us with the Vietnamese We contracted for
transportation services from the port to various
installations, like we had Newport in Saigon, and
we contracted for transportation from Newport to
Longbin, which was the main base of the first
logistical command and was really a very, very
large storage depot.
What our biggest contracts were for was
engineering services. What they would do would be
the posts and camps were run by a private concern.
In other words, if you are, let
me see,
Something happened to the water main. The water
was supplied. A private contractor would come in
and do that rather than a military man. You mean in a
camp? In a camp. In one of the private... That's
right. That's right. So all the engineering
services, the heating, the cooling, those types
of services were contractor operated. So we had a
lot of U.S. businesses over there. Yes, we did.
Well, I don't say a lot because most of it was
done by a few firms that sort of specialized in
that. I remember one was Pacific Architects and
Engineers. It was a very big firm handling that.
Ford Motor Company. Ford Motor Company did a lot of
our transportation contracts. Saigon, the
Vietnamese government, they were all for the
U.S.? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Well, what about this
Vietnamization program where we were trying to
get the Vietnamese to take care of themselves? I
really didn't see that because that was out in the
field. But...
The Vietnamese program that I was involved with
was, and I thought it was very successful, was to
get more Vietnamese businesses to furnish the
services. In other words, when I got there, there
was maybe a requirement that, I don't know if I'm
using the right figure, but say, for example, 5% of
our contracts had to be with Vietnamese firms. And
then they started to increase that to 10%, because
they wanted to do something for the Vietnamese
people, to give them not a stake in the outcome, but
more an opportunity to become self-sufficient,
to become businessmen, to do something for the
local economy, to get the jobs down to the
Vietnamese. So I always thought that was very,
very successful, because it kept on increasing
wildly. while I was there. So over your year, you
saw a great increase? I saw an increase, a mandated
increase. Who was mandating this? We were. Oh,
yes. Well, I think it probably came from, not the
military side, but came probably from agreements
between the Department of State and the
Vietnamese government. So we were interested in
making the Vietnamese government a more viable
and stronger entity. And I think one of the ways we
could do this is by assisting their economy. And
the way we assisted their economy was not just
pouring money in, but making them work for it. So I
think it was, and then we inquired our contractors
like Han Jin and Pacific Architects Engineers,
and there was another one, I forget, that ran power
plants on boats off the coast. We required them to
hire a certain percentage of Vietnamese labor. So
there was a constant program that had a lot of
forethought. to put money into the Vietnamese
economy, but not just merely give it, but for value
receipts. So that's where your department was all
around these contracts? Well, that's right. We
let the contracts, and we administered them. In
other words, through completion. And I said there
was a contract for operating floating generators
to supply power to some of the coasts. or some of the
other ones. There was a contract for laundry
service. There was a contract for produce, fresh
produce. There was a contract for ice cream.
Things that you wouldn't think of as having a
particularly warlike significance. But there
was a contract to do the hospital laundry. There
was a contract to sew the patches on the uniform. I
wouldn't think of all this. No, no, no. But it was a
very big operation, like the depot at Long Beach. I
don't think anybody in this country, unless
they've seen it, has any idea how large these
depots were. I mean, it was... They were laid out
like a checkerboard, geometrically, in other
words, in squares. And... And...
The country was flat where they were located in
Longbren. It wasn't hilly. And you could stand on
one of these streets that was maybe as wide as a
boulevard and look to the end and you couldn't, you
could hardly see the end. And on each side of you
were boxes stacked up over your head, well over
your head, stories high. And you could look either
way, to the left or to the right, or down the center
or back. If you were in the middle of this and
couldn't see either side, all you saw was boxes and
it was just like a city of supplies. And it was a
men's job to keep track of it, to deliver it, and to
know where it was and get it out. Was there a lot of it
being stolen and sitting on black market? But yes,
if you went down to Saigon, you would see stuff that
was being stolen. But mostly it was PX goods, you
know? Liquor, cigarettes, cameras, and that sort
of thing. I remember once I was involved with a...
We had lost a convoy between...
Newport, which was in Saigon, one of the Newports
in Saigon, and Long Beach. And what it had was
several truckloads, as I recollect, branded. So
it was a high desirability item. So we got a great
deal of flack about this. And they said,
well, what are you going to do about it?
And there were all sorts of things, suggestions.
Make the contractor take out insurance, which he
would just pass on to us. So that wasn't a solution.
And we had an armed jeep in the front of the convoy,
an armed jeep in the rear of the convoy. This one was
just diverted out and was gone before anybody
could determine what happened. So there was a
great deal of pressure to do something about it,
especially from the contractual end to stop this.
Until what we did was we looked at the rate of
thievery on the New York waterfront.
And for the volume handled, it was much more on the
New York waterfront than it was in our little ports
in Saigon. So the minute we pointed that up, that
killed that. So the thievery wasn't that much. It
was there, but they came to accept it as a cost of
doing business. And it wasn't the real war
material, which people would really be concerned
if we were losing... weapons and that into the
economy. But you weren't dealing with those
weapons? Oh, yes. That was coming. Oh, yes. The
weapons were on there, too, but they weren't
taking the weapons. That's right. No, that's
right. That's right. Because that would be
readily convertible on the black market. At least
we didn't have, at least that kind of problem
wasn't highly visible. It wasn't highly visible.
With the black market, goods that were readily
purveyable on the black market Now you talked
about, you said you had private contact with the
Vietnamese people and you said that, you know, you
thought they were really great people and
everything. Do you think a lot of Americans over
there, though, had some racism or sexism toward
them? Maybe people you worked with? What you saw
going on? Well, we saw them in a different context.
You know, we saw them as... as human beings. And so
I didn't see any there, but there's always a
certain amount with the GIs, I would think, of
coarse language, let's put it that way, towards
nationals of other countries which we're in.
I've never seen, I always took it upon, just
something which was said to be said without any
meaning. For example, you will hear people cuss,
and they may say something like, God damn, but They
don't mean it. It's just an expression. They don't
mean that God should suddenly come down and damn
someone. No one is that insensitive, or generally
that insensitive. But they say it because it's
something which they've learned to say or been
accustomed to say as giving a feeling of
irritability. And I think the same way with the GI.
They might... They might...
criticized the Vietnamese or looked derision
upon one or two, but it wasn't, I didn't get the
impression that it was really meant. It was really
meant. I didn't see much of it and I didn't think it
was really, really meant. Since you, you know, you
weren't fulfilled and everything, but Was any of
the herbal side of warfare going on around
Cyclone? No, it wasn't mentioned while I was
there. Oh, it wasn't even mentioned while you were
there? No, I never heard anything about the Agent
Orange or anything. No, I didn't. I didn't hear
that. No. Didn't hear it going on. Well, when Nixon
came into office in 69, you know, he wanted the war
to be at an end. And he kept talking about having...
a peace with honor. Could you see that as possible
after everything that had gone on, that we could
have peace with honor? As far from my position in
79, there wasn't any slacking of any effort. Oh, in
69? No, I didn't see any slacking of any effort in 69
or 70. I didn't see any signs of any regression
there. I mean, if you would have said to me, asked me
from my vantage point at 69, did I see any peace
overtures or feel that there was... Did you feel
that Anne was coming to a near? No. You didn't? No,
no, no, no. At that time, I thought I'd be back
again. Oh, you thought you... In other words, hey,
I didn't think, I think it'd be still going. Right.
Well, even like when Wes Moreland was talking
about that by 68 we'd be finished. You don't think
people... Well, I was there at 69. I don't know.
Let's see. He was there when I was there. I thought
Abrams was there. Abrams was there when you were
there. Yeah. I saw him once or twice. Oh, you did see
him? Yeah.
What was he like? No personal association. Oh,
very nice gentleman. Very nice. They're usually
quiet. They're not boisterous. I didn't meet
Westmoreland there. I met Westmoreland in
Vietnam. Not Vietnam, Thailand. Oh, so you had
been with him before. In Thailand. He was in
Vietnam when I was in Thailand. I was in Thailand in
64. He was in Vietnam, I believe, at that time. So he
came and visited Thailand. So I was in 69. Oh, but
there was no, you felt that you were going to maybe
be back for another time? Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah,
yeah. I didn't see any end of it there. Okay. Well,
do you feel like by not having ever declared a war,
that this really hindered our involvement? Not
from the level I was at. Not from where you were? No,
no, no. No. No, I didn't see it hinder anything that
we wanted to do. Now, of course, if you were to
declare a war, what you might have done, you might
have put more emphasis, put more stuff into the
country on it. Because remember that, as I said,
the engineering
services was performed by contractors. And I
think that was designed probably to make more
troops available for military duties. Now, so
that was a restraint. That was at least the
perceived restraint, which certainly wouldn't
have been in effect if there was a war on it. So I
didn't think we were, well,
from my perspective, it looked like we were.
putting in as much as we monitored there. But there
were these personnel restraints, so perhaps we
couldn't field as many divisions and put as much
strain. So maybe from a higher viewpoint, there
was a hindrance because there wasn't a declared
war. But I think that only affected, I would think
that if there was more popular support at home, for
the Vietnamese campaign, there probably would
have been, it wouldn't have made a difference. No,
it wouldn't have made a difference. Whether they
call it a war or something else. If it was popular
support, they would have did more. I guess they
felt that there was some restraint. Well, from the
Vietnam War as a whole, what lessons do you feel the
U.S. Army learned from getting involved in such a
long war to get going? Well, I think what we learned
was that
you need, to run a campaign like that, you need a lot
of support personnel for every frontline troop
you have. It takes a lot of support personnel to
keep a guy out on the line. So I think, I don't know
what our force was over there. But I wouldn't be a
bit surprised at all to find out that we had maybe
three to one support personnel to combat
personnel. Trigger pullers, as they call them.
Trigger pullers. But of the other things we did, we
certainly did a tremendous job with the medical
services.
In fact,
I don't think that there is an unknown soldier from
Vietnam just because the scientific
has been so advanced that we'd be able to pull
somebody out or else if we couldn't pull them out,
we were able to get the remains and identify them.
But I forget what, they had one startling
statistic about if you were hit and you got to that
helicopter, Uh, very rarely would you get lost.
Very rarely would you get lost. The medical
services were so good. Did you have, did you get,
um, much contact with the truth, the guy that was
actually on the line? No, no. No? I really don't.
Hey, when I visited those installations on the
outlying... By the co-workers? That's right.
When I would visit them to see how the contracts
were doing, I would. But if you say, hey, how many
times was I under mortis, mortar attack, you know,
you could count them on one hand. Oh, so you weren't
in one fire. No, no, no, no, no, no. With Saigon,
maybe we'd get involved with a terrorist incident
here and there. Do you think that was always North
Vietnamese? Was that, I mean, some of the South
Vietnamese? I really don't know. The one we saw, we
had one incident. All the stuff was sandbagged on
the lower quarters because what they would do is
ride along on a scooter.
Yes, with a young lady on the back usually. And when
you'd be standing at the bus stop or something and
they'd throw the hand grenade or the satchel
charge at you. And so they had all these sandbags
and that to protect the building, and you could
jump behind and the rest of it. And right outside
the agency, we had one go off. And what it was, it
went off in the hand and blew the person in half.
That's how I know that relatively young people
involved. And we had the hotel where I was attacked
Oh, when you were there in Hotonga? Yeah. And
everybody pulled duty officer each... I guess it
came about...
I guess it came about once a month you pulled it, all
night. You stood outside and there was a little
barricade and you had a pistol and somebody had an
M16 and you just walked around the street just...
just to guard the sleeping people in case there was
an attack on the hotel. But there was an attack on
the hotel I was there. It blew out all the windows.
We were very, very lucky. What happened was a
couple of young boys, really young, were pushing a
baby carriage And on this baby carriage, they had
cigarettes and chewing gum, like a little vendor.
And they were pushing it towards the hotel down a
side street. And we had the guard there with the M16
there, and he was like in a little cement
barricade. And when the kids got close to the
hotel, the guard said, stop, stop. And at that
time, one of the kids reached down and pulled out a
satchel charge. I figured it was about a pound and a
half of plastic. And he threw it at the guard. Well,
that put the guard fell down behind his barricade
because he saw that charge coming. And while the
charge was coming, the kids then ran away. Now, the
charge went off, blew out all the windows, just
every window that faced that street in that hotel.
Just blew them all out. Were you in your room? No, I
was downstairs. I was there. Just blew them all
out. And the kids... They freeze and they threw the
charge to get the guard down and to make their
escape. And they made their escape. But the little
baby carriage didn't explode. See, they had 60
pounds of tin. Oh, they had that whole thing? Yes.
What was it in there? It was 60 pounds of plastic
explosive. And it was in a shaped charge, but it was
packed into a helmet. And the helmet was faced
forward. So they wanted to focus the blast, and
that's what do it, at the building. And the
detonator didn't go off. Well, these young
children, were they making these bombs? I
wouldn't know. Probably not. Probably not. And
they weren't, well, you know, when you say young,
from the guy, he said he looked like 15, maybe 16,
you know. But you really can't tell, you know, what
maybe 15 or 16 to him might be 23 to you or me. But they
were probably a little young. But the little girl
on the motorcycle and her friend that gets blown up
when the thing blew up prematurely,
They looked young, but they wanted children. Were
there a lot of kids running around? Oh, yeah, yeah.
What were the children like? Oh, great. You've
never seen such love and affection as bestowed by
Vietnamese on their children. I mean, it's
really... They never raised their hand to the
children. They worshipped the ground the
children walked on. They're very solicitous of
the children. a great deal of demonstrable love
and affection. Well, did a lot of refugees come to
Saigon? Yes, they did. They did, but you never saw
them as refugees. Where I came in contact with the
refugees was, one thing you, which was hard to get
used to, the kids stayed up and played to all hours
of the night. In other words, you would be coming
back from work at 7, 8 o'clock, whatever it is, and
the kids would be out there playing. They played
just at night. But the parents were always there
and watching, not unsupervised or anything. But I
think that was really very impressive. He said,
these are very fine people, the way they love their
children, and demonstrated it. But the refugees
where I came in contact with the refugees were
several
contractors employed them. And we had one
Catholic priest. who took these refugees to them,
worked them into a business, and they were doing
laundry and selling produce. Was this Catholic
priest a Vietnamese? No, I think he was French. Oh,
he was French. I think a lot came from the North. As I
said, the secretary I had working for me came from
the North originally.
Her father was a Vietnamese army officer. and came
down south. I think he was done. Well, did these
South Vietnamese, did they talk about the North
Vietnamese or the different people, or were they
all Vietnamese? It was never discussed. Oh, it was
never discussed. Never discussed. I never had
that sort of conversation with them. With the
Arvin troops that I came into contact with, you
just didn't ask them, you know what I mean? Right.
As they say, it would have been politicking again.
They would think you were trying to pry. They did
not want to pry. That's right. Well, let me ask you
one thing about the children. Did we have some kind
of education? What kind of education did they have
over there for the children? I really don't... Oh
yes, they did have a... The other thing was, it was
very much like Thailand. At least what I saw, there
was some educational program and it was
regimented in the sense that the kids would go to
school and they have their little uniforms.
And it reminded me very much of the little uniforms
we wore or I wore when I went to parochial school 50
years ago. The little boys wore a white shirt and
blue trousers, and the little girls wore a white
blouse.